Welcome to the first
week of our course
on paralleled functional
programming with Java.
The lessons in this
week first provide
an overview of key
parallelism concepts,
as well as explain how
these concepts are supported
by core Java
parallelism frameworks,
including the fork
join pool framework,
the parallel streams framework,
and the completable futures
framework.
We then summarize
how these frameworks
are applied throughout the
course in several case study
apps, which are available at
open source forum at my GitHub
repository.
After this first introduction
to parallel functional
programming, we begin our
coverage of the Java Streams
framework, which
creates pipelines
of operations that process
sequences of data elements.
The streams framework
was introduced in Java 8,
and provides several
benefits to developers
of parallel functional programs.
First, it's a declarative
programming paradigm
that focuses on what
behaviors to perform
rather than on how to perform
them, thereby making programs
more concise and readable.
Second, it connects
behaviors together
automatically into a pipeline,
thereby making programs
more flexible and compostable.
And third, streams can be
paralyzed without the need
to write any multi-threaded
code, which simplifies
scalability on modern
multicore platforms,
especially for so-called
embarrassingly parallel
programs whose tasks have no
dependencies on each other.
Streams are an essential part
of Java's parallel functional
programming
capabilities, which is
why we focus so heavily
on them in this course.
This week covers the
fundamentals of streams,
common factor methods
that create a stream,
and common aggregate
operations that process
all data elements in a stream.
All these features
apply to both sequential
and parallel streams.
We also explain how streams
compare and contrast
with other Java classes, such
as IO streams and the Java
Collection framework.
The Java Streams
framework is an embodiment
of a pipes and filters pattern,
which divides and apps tasks
into multiple self-contained
data processing steps
and connects these steps
together by intermediate data
buffers to form a data
processing pipeline.
This pattern first
appeared in volume one
of the Patern-Oriented
Software Architecture Book,
and has since been
revised in other venues.
The final lesson this
week outlines this pattern
and shows how it's been
applied in other technologies,
such as pipelines, in
Unix command line shells,
System V streams, and
Java reactive streams.
So let's get started.